Successful software starts@reagan.com. Raygun APM
provides.net application performance monitoring. Unlike
anything you've experienced before, offering
greater clarity around how your
software is performing for your
customers more than any other
APM provider, easily detect and
diagnose issues impacting end users
and monitor every part of
your stack. In one powerful
solution, you can monitor unlimited
hosts, enjoy Richard trace data
and call stack information and
unblock those hard to solve
performance bottlenecks that affect your
web and mobile apps. It's
time to get back to
building great software instead of
fighting it. Start your journey
to better software quality and
try Reagan free@raygun.com. That's R
a Y G U n.com
today. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes today. I'm
talking with Glenn Vanderburg, VP
of engineering at first and
a pretty darn good public
speaker. I really enjoyed your
talk on real software engineering.
Thank you very much. I'm
always glad when people encounter
that and, and enjoy watching
it, what does it feel
like when you you've done
a bunch of talks? You've
been speaking and writing and
talking about software for many,
many years, but then you
do a talk and somehow
it resonates more than the
others and it becomes your
best talk. It feels great.
And a little bit intimidating.
I mean, this, this talk
I've been giving it off
and on for about eight
years, but even eight years
ago, it was the product
of about 10 years of
thinking and reading. And so
it kind of almost feels
like that's the peak and
I'm not likely to ever
hit that peak again, but
that's okay. If people are
still asking you to give
one talk after eight years
and asking you to give
it again and again, that's
a good feeling. That is
a good feeling. It is
good to hit a home
run. It does make you
wonder if you'll ever hit
a home run again. It's
like, no, no, you really
want this talk. Well, you
talk about this one. We're
good with that. So you've
given this talk many, many
times, probably a couple of
dozen and you know, you'd
think it would get stale,
but people like the talk
and it says something, the
talk is called real software
engineering. You've done it as
keynotes. You've done it several
times and there's videos of
them online and I'll make
sure to put them in
the show notes. What is
the essence of a real
software engineering? The, the essence
of it is, you know,
I, I studied software engineering
in college, in the eighties
and started trying to apply
it at work in the
nineties. And there was a
way it was all taught
then. And, and something, we
were all aspiring to do
to figure out the right
way to build software. And
it Never quite felt right
to me. And something always
seemed to be wrong with
that idea. And it took
me, like I said, a
number of years to get
to the bottom of it.
But the essence is that
software engineering like any branch
of engineering really isn't that
prescribed and regimented, there's not
just one way to do
it. There are the, the,
the essence is finding the
right balance of cost and
time to market and safety
and robustness for the problem
at hand and figuring out
the responsible way to build
it. What about the, the,
the analogies that have been
used the extended analogies for
many, many years about being
an engineer and building a
house versus being an engineer
and building software. People have
an idea about how building
houses is going to go.
And the fact of the
matter is that we've been
building houses for a long
time and across the realm
of engineering. That's like one
of the best understood problems
that we have even then,
though there are cost overruns
often and things artist's stable,
as you might wish. It's
not quite as predictable and
wrote, I guess, as people
seem to think engineering always
is. And furthermore, when people
think of engineering, they tend
to think of physical structures
and civil engineering and bridges
and things like that. And
that's where a lot of
the analogies come from, but
there are a lot of
different kinds of engineering. And
some of them are very,
very different from civil and
structural engineering and a lot
more experimental and ad hoc
like software is why We
continue to, to recreate the
wheel in software engineering. And
there's whether it be extreme
programming 20 years ago, or
peer pair programming or sprints
or agile, like we're all
trying to figure this out.
I am not a structural
engineer, but it doesn't feel
from the outside as a
lay person that they're coming
up with really revolutionary new
ways to put up walls
and stuff. No, I think
there are several reasons for
that. One is physical structures
have at most three dimensions.
So you can depict that
in drawings, you might need
a whole bunch of drawings
to describe different aspects of
the thing, but you can
depict it in drawings and
get really concrete, no pun
intended about what you're building
software is abstract and any
program of any complexity has
multiple dimensions and it's more
than three and I'm pretty
sure the number is not
an integer. Software's kind of
fractally complex. And it's hard
to visualize. It's hard to
describe precisely. And a lot
of what we're doing comes
from experimenting with ways of
communicating clearly both to other
engineers, but also to the
machine, what it is we're
building. Exactly That is really
thoughtful and gets. That is
a way of thinking about
it that I had not
done before we say. And
I have said that it's
really about communication, like the
slapping, the keyboard part, and
the four loop is really
secondary it's. Are you a
effective communicator? That's kind of
what separates the, the mediocre
developers from the, from the
good ones. But what you're
describing is that at least
I can draw a picture
and say, make it look
like that, but we're still
trying to figure out the
right boxes and lines to
describe the software even. Sure.
And because, and, you know,
we, we spend a lot
of time. I talked about
learning software engineering in the
eighties and nineties, and we
spent a lot of time
investigating ways of depicting software
in pictures. And none of
that has been very successful.
And part of it is
the multidimensionality problem. And it
turns out that the best
way we know to pursue
really precisely described software is
in programming languages. And I
think a lot of, you
know, it's, it's funny that
this many years on we're
still inventing new programming languages
almost as fast or faster
than people can reasonably learn
them. And you would think
we would have figured out
something, you know, and settled
on it by then. But
I think a lot of
that is seeking ways to
describe not only the precise
idea, but the intent behind
it, of what software is
and how it works. Yeah,
it is. All of this
is an expression of one's
intent and whether it be
a picture's worth a thousand
words, and we draw the
user interface and say, this
should look like this. There's
never been a great way
to express that. A thousand
words is a lot of
words. Yeah. It's, it is
funny though, that the language
does your, or do the
year, you know, is, is
still happening. Like, and now
we ended up with the
language that none of us
really deserve, but it's the
language we have, which is
Java script. Like the least
qualified language has become the
one that everything's expressed in.
It was a moaning that
just earlier today, you know,
you mentioned the picture is
worth a thousand words thing.
I remember one conversation I
had that really crystallized some
of the thoughts in real
software engineering for me was
probably 13 or 14 years
ago. I was having lunch
with Dave Thomas of the
pragmatic programmers. And I was
wrestling with, you know, why
UML sucks so bad. And,
and I said, you know,
it, it, the idea seems
to make perfect sense. If
a picture is worth a
thousand words, you know, why
does it turn out to
not be too helpful to
draw pictures of our software?
I mean, arguably it might
help you communicate some things
about it, but it doesn't
seem to help help us
think about it very well.
And he, in his wonderful
way of piercing through, you
know, misconceptions, he immediately turned
around and said, animals can
see pictures. Humans are creatures
of language. And it just
sort of totally turned that
picture is worth a thousand
words thing on its head
to, well, you know, maybe
in some circumstances, but when
you want to be precise
about complicated things, languages a
lot more, That's a tough
one. That's a tough, I
spent much of the nineties
doing UML diagrams as well.
And whether you were switching.
And of course, for people
who are maybe younger, who
are listening to the show,
a UML is the unified
modeling language. It was basically
the boxes and the lines
that they told us would
solve all our problems. And
a lot of time, I
just thought that, well, an
activity diagram or a use
case diagram or a state
machine were just different lenses
to look at the same
problem. But then once, once
they became seven or eight
different diagrams, I felt like
I kept repeating myself. Yes.
And none of them said
what I needed to say.
Yeah. And, and really in
order to get a full
view of the system and
talk about it with any
degree of ease, you needed
to be able to kind
of rapidly move between those
different views of the system
and the tools all made
that kind of complicated and
clumsy. There is an article
that was written by in
the Atlantic and opinion piece.
A number of years ago
that I thought was a
little bit provocative. And it
said, programmers, stop calling yourself
engineers because A screenshot of
that article in one of
my talks, yeah. I felt
that was a little bit
aggressive. And it said engineer
as an aspirational title in
software development, it basically belittled
the entire engineer. And by
us using it, it cheapened
technology. Yeah. I found that
article really. I wish I
had read it, re rewrite
it recently. And I had
it more on the top
of my mind, but I
found that article frustrating because
in some ways it got
so close to the truth.
And in some ways it
was so far engineering is
an aspirational title, even for,
you know, the traditional engineering
fields. It's one of the
reasons I'm really passionate about
using the word engineer and
kind of reclaiming that for
software developers. I've had people
kind of ask me, you
know, why does it matter
or are you just, you
know, trying to, to gain
more respect or something like
that. And no, it's that
using that name for yourself,
carries with it, some expectations
about the seriousness with which
you take your field and
the job you're doing and
trying to have some rigor
around it and not be
careless with people's money or
lives or data or whatever.
So sure. Aspirational, that's fine.
But then, you know, in
that article, when he, when
he talked it, he spent
a lot of that article
talking about and comparing software
development to other engineering disciplines.
And it was kind of
funny because he made the
same mistakes that, that people
always seem to do have
a only focusing on civil
and structural engineering, large scale
physical objects, which is the
most unlike it's the opposite
end of the spectrum of
engineering from software development. And
also he made it seem
a lot more predictable and
defined and prescribed than it
actually is in the real
world. One of the wonderful
things about giving this real
software engineering talk a couple
of dozen times in different
places around the world is
that every time I do
it, somebody comes up to
me who is now a
software developer, but has a
formal education in some branch
of engineering or another. And
sometimes they have some challenges
for me and are able
to correct me and help
me refine the message of
the talk. But most often
what I hear is yes,
you've got it exactly right.
Engineering. Isn't what non-engineers think
it is. It's always more
creative and full of dead
ends and blind alleys and,
and iterating through mistakes and
trying to get better. Yeah,
that's true. It really is
a way of thinking. I
always tease my parents when
they call for tech support
and they say, you know,
my mom literally emailed me
about the router earlier. She
was like, you know, what
should I do? And I
don't want to be flippant,
but I'm like, I don't
know, man. I mean, unplug
it. Like, I'm just going
to poke at the thing,
you know, and the idea
that we somehow have the
answers and it, it is
a structured, you know, sometimes
stuff happens and you got
to unplug it and plug
it back in again. That's
right. Why that concrete mix
is bad. Let's mix it
again. For years, I had
this kind of, a bit
of tension in my relationship
with my wife, where she
would ask me how to
solve some problem on the
computer with a program she
was using or something she
was trying to do. And
she had some programming background
as well. So she's not
the stereotypical tech support case,
but she would say, how
do I do this? And
I would say, you know,
well, scoot over and let
me sit down and, and
well, no, don't do it
for me. Show me how
to, or tell me how
to do it. And then
I'll learn. And we, for
years, we were frustrated with
each other about this until
I finally understood myself well
enough to explain to her,
I don't know how to
do anything on computers. I
know how to figure out
how to do stuff on
computers and that's, that's about
it. I, I generally don't
know the answer to the
question you're asking me, but
I have enough background knowledge
and good problem solving strategies
to be able to sit
down and poke around in
the menus and figure it
out. So, you know, that
was kind of a real
turning point for us. And
now she scoots over and
lets me sit down and
figure it out. And then
I undo everything and has
to have her sit down
until her explained to her
what I did and how
to do it. And it
works out. It's kind of
like, what's your password? I
don't know. Let me touch
the keyboard on my fingers.
Yes, exactly. This episode is
sponsored by Datadog a cloud
monitoring platform built by engineers
for engineers, Datadog enables full
stack observability for cloud infrastructure,
applications and logs. In one
tightly integrated platform, you can
see across all your servers,
containers, apps, and services in
one place to monitor performance
and make data driven decisions
with a rich dashboards and
algorithmic alerts, collaboration tools. Datadog
provides your team with the
tools that they need to
quickly troubleshoot and optimize modern
applications. See for yourself with
a free 14 day trial
and receive a free Datadog.
T-shirt just go to bitly.com/data
dog shirt to get started.
That's Bitly bit L y.com/data
dog shirt. There was something
that you mentioned before we
started recording. I wanted to
talk about which may be
apply to that as you
move towards the, you improve
your competence in something it's
the Dreyfus model of skill
acquisition, which when looked at
it's four qualities, recollection recognition,
decision awareness, and then each
of those qualities is binary.
It smells like the engineers
equivalent of the Myers Briggs
personal strengths. Yeah. Yeah. Do
do you mean in the
sense of not really actually
being based on science and
having any reality behind it,
or It appears to be
like let's put together a
table and describe how one,
you know, how a way
to think about things, whether
it be Myers-Briggs or the
Dreyfus model or frankly astronomy,
right. Or astrology rather, pardon
me? The Dreyfus model is
something, another thing I learned
about from the programmatic programmers
and I'm, I may be
completely butchering this in my
memory, but my recollection is
that Andy Hunt's wife is
a nurse or is in
the healthcare field. And so
this came to his attention
and it's part of how
nurses, how the nursing field
trains new nurses, and initially
your sole job is to
learn to follow the rules.
Yes, the rules are contextual
and they're complicated and there's
all kinds of situations. But
as a, a beginning nurse,
you don't think about that.
These are the rules, you
do it this way. You
do it this way all
the time. And as you
grow in competence and gain
more experience, you reach a
point where you start to
learn the reasons for the
rules and the rationale behind
them. And start, can start
seeing some of the context
that, that applies in those
reasons. And then the third
stage is you start to,
you have enough understanding of
the rationale and the context
context, and you learn when
it's okay to break the
rules and go off script
a little bit because the
situation calls for it and
the rules don't apply here.
And then for the fourth
stage of really expert experienced
nurses, you've internalized those things
enough that you don't think
about the rules anymore. You
act in the context that
a patient is and, and
deal with their problems and
choose the right thing to
do. Based on your experience,
Brian Merrick has written about
these things a lot from
a similar perspective, his wife
is a veterinarian and a
professor of veterinary medicine. And
she talks about teaching students
to diagnose, you know, cows.
And it's not something so
simple. You can put into
a nice, neat decision tree
just takes a long period
of apprenticeship where you walk
through. And well, this one
looks great to me. Well,
no, you can tell it's
sick because X, Y, and
Z, and then they come
to the next one and
well, it's sick. No, it's
not. Well, you said it
was sick if it was
doing X, Y, and Z.
Well, well, yes, but this
one's also doing a, B
and C, and that means
it's perfectly fine. And you
just, you know, the complexities
of a complex field with
a lot of different things
to think about. I saw
a wonderful viral tweet that
was talking about the show,
that TV show house, when
the doctor always seems to
know what the problem is
like, he's the Sherlock Holmes
of medicine. Right. You know,
so someone comes in with
a rash and a fever
and they're about to die
and they're, you know, they're
going tachycardic and then houses
like, did you check his
nose for raisins? And then
of course at the end,
everyone's like, of course, Oh
God, the raisins. Yeah. Raisins
have that's, that's exactly what
there's no, and there's nothing,
no flowchart would ever have
potential to raisins in his
nose, but that was it.
And that was the problem.
And if you look at
the Dreyfus model, when it
talks about decisions, as you
move from novice through competent
to kind of proficient your
decision making process, as you
point out, it goes from
analytical to intuitive, which as
I am becoming a senior
programmer, and I say senior
in the elder programmer way,
the term, I recently solved
a problem at work. And
someone asked me, how could
you have known that? And
the only answer I had
was I'm old. Yes. I
mean, I don't know how
you teach a 22 year
old about, you know, uni
code and bit bitterness and
little Indian and you know,
other than having been there.
Right. Exactly. I pretty early
in my career, you know,
10 years in, I guess.
So there's, there's the old
thing again, pretty 10 years
seems it seems early in
my career to me, I
started noticing myself making decisions
based on intuition and hunches.
That felt really cool. But
as a member of a
team, I didn't think I
could just get away with
that all the time. Right.
You have to have some
rationale and, and whether you're
justifying it to peers or
explaining it to more junior
developers that you're trying to
help them grow and learn
the things, you know, so
I, I didn't always do
this, but I would kind
of challenge myself to, okay,
you, you made this decision
based on a hunch, but
that hunch had to come
from somewhere. Your mind is
distilling your experiences in this
sub cognitive way, but it's
still a product of your
experience. And so I sort
of made this rough rule
of thumb for myself that
I didn't get to go
and advocate for one of
those hunch based decisions until
I'd kind of delved in
and traced it and found
a way to explain it
rationally. And that was a
tremendously useful exercise for me.
And it helped the people
around me too, but it
also helped me to, to
kind of resurface some of
those older experiences and, and
consciously think about how they
shaped my thinking. And I
have found that having a
blog and having a blog
for 15, 20 years has
been super useful because when
something happens, I think to
myself, wow, okay, now I
know that that's the thing,
right? I should probably write
that down. So someone else
will know that that's the
thing. And I recently had,
I spent about 16 hours
debugging, a segmentation fault on
a raspberry PI. Yeah, exactly.
Oh, it was lovely. 16
hours of my life. And
it turned out that I
had been FTP binaries in
ASCII mode and it was
swapping out the trend line.
So you laugh, right. People
laughing at each other. And,
and the thing that was
so ridiculous about that is
when I started writing it
up, I was like, Oh,
I should have seen that
20 minutes in, like, what
was I doing? And then
when I wrote it up
as, as with all good
blogs, the real quality is
in the content of the
comments, the commenters was like,
Oh, I knew it was
that within four sentences. Of
course. Yeah. I could see
you crashing into the wall
and I couldn't yell to
stop you, but it was
fun to watch, but writing
that up and understanding that,
and then sharing it and
making sure that people understand
that failure and failing as
fast as you can, as
often as you can. That's
really how you become a
good Programmer. And it's, it's,
it's a big part of
the essence of engineering as
well. It is, Isn't it,
but it can, can it
be, and like, how do
we not knock buildings down
accidentally, but we do allow
software programs to fail. If
you're interested in what real
engineering is like. And the
role of failure the book
to start with is by
Henry Henry Petroski, professor of engineering
at Duke university. I believe
he wrote a book many
years ago, called to engineer
is human. And it's a
book of essays about the
role of failure in engineering
and design and in debates
about this kind of thing
over the years, I've heard
many people say things like,
yeah, real engineers have math,
so they can prove that
their design won't fail. And
yet civil engineering designs fail
every year to a greater
or lesser degree. And fortunately
for everyone, most of the
failures are rather small scale
and or they happen before
the structure is open or
anything like that. But you
know, the bridge that, that
collapsed in Italy earlier this
year, tremendous tragedy, the, the
ultimate and, you know, the
full reports haven't come out
yet and everything. So I'm
speculating based on what I
read of other engineers speculating
about it. But the fundamental
structural flaw in that bridge
was kind of around from
the beginning. It was a
cable stayed bridge that used
just one stay on each
side of the tower. So
it was a single point
of failure. And it wasn't
very resilient in the face
of any, any of the
kinds of stresses that would
be applied to a bridge
and engineers in all fields
are constantly trying to balance
robustness and safety against costs
and trying to get their
projects built and trying to
meet their customer's budgets and
things like that. And there
are failures all the time,
The, a that bridge, the
Miranda bridge was being made
in 1967, which you would
think, why would it, it
should have broken in the
last 50, 60 years, but
then we have things like,
you know, SSL or, you
know, that are being broken
where it's like, wow, I
wrote that coat in the
late, late seventies. And now
that broke, right? These things
do happen. It could run,
it can be robust and
still, And you know, robust
in. And here's the context
thing robust for most of
the circumstances for which it
was designed. But then you
take it outside of the
initial or original design center
of that project and applied
different kinds of stresses to
it. And all of a
sudden, it's, it's an a
failure mode, You know, that
is, that kind of pops
us all the way off
the, you know, pops off
the stack all the way
back to the beginning where
you talked about context. My,
my family asked me why
they couldn't run windows seven
anymore. And I said, the
internet is a different internet.
You know, like if you
want to run it unplugged
air gap, please feel free.
But if you want to
put it on the actual
internet, I would encourage you
not to because the context
of the entire planet and
everything has changed hardware, software,
connectivity, it was hard to
explain that that things are
different now. Yeah. Security engineering
is, is a particularly troublesome
thing because it's always based
on what you think is
hard. And people are always
finding ways to make things
that used to be hard,
easy, and, you know, even
something as simple as the
scripts that script kitties run,
right. You and I are
old enough to remember when,
you know, you think about
some of those crazy buffer,
overrun attacks and, and having
to concoct just the right
series of instructions to land
at just the right memory
address. And think of how
many times you'd have to
do that before you found
a computer where memory was
laid out, just so, and
it's just, you know, nobody
would bother to do that,
but then you wrap a
script around it and automated
and figure out a way
to test to see if
it worked right. And you
can do it hundreds of
thousands of times. And now
all of a sudden it
becomes easy. I recently saw
something really interesting where someone
was doing fuzz testing on
a FaceTime call and they
took over and crashed an
iPhone simply by sending different
pixels down the wire. And
it upset the FaceTime codec
and went all the way
down to the beast in
the bowels of the beast
itself. Wow. Who would even
think about that? If that's
not real software engineering? I
don't know what it is.
Yeah. As a particularly fiendish
kind, but yeah. Well, people
can check out your talk
real software engineering. You point
out on your website@vanderberg.org, that
there's a number of different
versions and nicely enough, you've
listed them in order of
your preference with the version
from a conference called software
art thou as being your
favorite version of that. Yeah.
That's a great little lecture
series put on by Zen
desk in Melbourne Australia. They,
you know, periodically have a
speaker in to do a
talk there in downtown Melbourne,
and they were kind enough
to invite me and they
had a good audio video
set up and it's by
far the best version of
the talk. Fantastic. It's so
nice when you do go
to a conference and they've
set it up such that
they'll make the definitive version
of that. It's almost like
a stand up comic getting
the, the, the, the studio
album done, just so, so
now we can put it
on Netflix. That's exactly it.
Fantastic. Well, thank you so
much for chatting with me,
Glenn Vanderburg. Thanks for having
me on this has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you again next
week. .